Java is one of the most popular and widely used programming languages.

Java has been one of the most popular programming languages for many years.
Java is Object Oriented. However, it is not considered as pure object-oriented as it provides support for primitive data types (like int, char, etc)
The Java codes are first compiled into byte code (machine-independent code). Then the byte code runs on Java Virtual Machine (JVM) regardless of the underlying architecture.
Java syntax is similar to C/C++. But Java does not provide low-level programming functionalities like pointers. Also, Java codes are always written in the form of classes and objects.
Java is used in all kinds of applications like Mobile Applications (Android is Java-based), desktop applications, web applications, client-server applications, enterprise applications, and many more.
When compared with C++, Java codes are generally more maintainable because Java does not allow many things which may lead to bad/inefficient programming if used incorrectly. For example, non-primitives are always references in Java. So we cannot pass large objects (like we can do in C++) to functions, we always pass references in Java. One more example, since there are no pointers, bad memory access is also not possible.
When compared with Python, Java kind of fits between C++ and Python. The programs are written in Java typically run faster than corresponding Python programs and slower than C++. Like C++, Java does static type checking, but Python does not.
We summarize the most commonly used Java language features and APIs in the textbook.


Hello, World.
Hello, World in Java

Editing, compiling, and executing.
Compiling Hello, World in Java

Built-in data types.
Built-in types of data

Declaration and assignment statements.
Assignment statements

Integers.
int data type
Integer expressions

Floating-point numbers.
double data type
double expressions

Booleans.
boolean data type
Boolean operators

Comparison operators.
Comparison operators
Comparison examples

Printing.
System.out.print()
